
1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010 Oct;163(4):601-7. doi: 10.1530/EJE-10-0241. Epub 2010 Aug 
2.

Adiposity and insulin resistance correlate with telomere length in middle-aged
Arabs: the influence of circulating adiponectin.

Al-Attas OS(1), Al-Daghri NM, Alokail MS, Alfadda A, Bamakhramah A, Sabico S,
Pritlove D, Harte A, Tripathi G, McTernan PG, Kumar S, Chrousos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Obesity Research Center, King Saud University,
Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

OBJECTIVE: Studies in obesity have implicated adipocytokines in the development
of insulin resistance, which in turn may lead to accelerated aging. In this
study, we determined associations of chromosomal telomere length (TL) to markers 
of obesity and insulin resistance in middle-aged adult male and female Arabs with
and without diabetes mellitus type 2 (DMT2).
DESIGN AND METHODS: One hundred and ninety-three non-diabetic and DMT2 subjects
without complications (97 males and 96 females) participated in this
cross-sectional study. Clinical data, as well as fasting blood samples, were
collected. Serum glucose and lipid profile were determined using routine
laboratory methods. Serum insulin, leptin, adiponectin, resistin, tumor necrosis 
factor-α, and PAI-1 were quantified using customized multiplex assay kits. High
sensitive C-reactive protein (hsCRP) and angiotensin II (ANG II) were measured
using ELISAs. Circulating leukocyte TL was examined by quantitative real-time
PCR.
RESULTS: Circulating chromosomal leukocyte TL had significant inverse
associations with body mass index (BMI), systolic blood pressure, fasting
insulin, homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR),
low-density lipoprotein (LDL)- and total cholesterol, ANG II and hsCRP levels.
Adiponectin, BMI, systolic blood pressure, and LDL cholesterol predicted 47% of
the variance in TL (P<0.0001). HOMA-IR was the most significant predictor for TL 
in males, explaining 35% of the variance (P=0.01). In females, adiponectin
accounted for 28% of the variance in TL (P=0.01).
CONCLUSION: Obesity and insulin resistance are associated with chromosomal TL
among adult Arabs. Evidence of causal relations needs further investigation. The 
positive association of adiponectin to TL has clinical implications as to the
possible protective effects of this hormone from accelerated aging.

DOI: 10.1530/EJE-10-0241 
PMCID: PMC2938925
PMID: 20679357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

