
1. Int J Epidemiol. 2015 Aug;44(4):1277-87. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyu236. Epub 2014 Dec
25.

Adiposity is associated with DNA methylation profile in adipose tissue.

Agha G(1), Houseman EA(2), Kelsey KT(3), Eaton CB(4), Buka SL(5), Loucks EB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
MA, USA, gagha@hsph.harvard.edu.
(2)College of Public Health and Human Sciences, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Brown University School of Public Health,
Providence, RI, USA, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Brown University School of Public Health,
Providence, RI, USA, Department of Family Medicine, Alpert Medical School of
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Brown University School of Public Health,
Providence, RI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Adiposity is a risk factor for type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular
disease, suggesting an important role for adipose tissue in the development of
these conditions. The epigenetic underpinnings of adiposity are not well
understood, and studies of DNA methylation in relation to adiposity have rarely
focused on target adipose tissue. Objectives were to evaluate whether genome-wide
DNA methylation profiles in subcutaneous adipose tissue and peripheral blood
leukocytes are associated with measures of adiposity, including central fat mass,
body fat distribution and body mass index.
METHODS: Participants were 106 men and women (mean age 47 years) from the New
England Family Study. DNA methylation was evaluated using the Infinium
HumanMethylation450K BeadChip. Adiposity phenotypes included dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry-assessed android fat mass, android:gynoid fat ratio and trunk:limb
fat ratio, as well as body mass index.
RESULTS: Adipose tissue genome-wide DNA methylation profiles were associated with
all four adiposity phenotypes, after adjusting for race, sex and current smoking 
(omnibus p-values <0.001). After further adjustment for adipose cell-mixture
effects, associations with android fat mass, android:gynoid fat ratio, and
trunk:limb fat ratio remained. In gene-specific analyses, adiposity phenotypes
were associated with adipose tissue DNA methylation in several genes that are
biologically relevant to the development of adiposity, such as AOC3, LIPE, SOD3, 
AQP7 and CETP. Blood DNA methylation profiles were not associated with adiposity,
before or after adjustment for blood leukocyte cell mixture effects.
CONCLUSION: Findings show that DNA methylation patterns in adipose tissue are
associated with adiposity.

© The Author 2014; all rights reserved. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of the International Epidemiological Association.

DOI: 10.1093/ije/dyu236 
PMCID: PMC4588857
PMID: 25541553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

