
1. EBioMedicine. 2017 May;19:60-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.03.037. Epub 2017 Apr 
26.

ANRIL Promoter DNA Methylation: A Perinatal Marker for Later Adiposity.

Lillycrop K(1), Murray R(2), Cheong C(3), Teh AL(3), Clarke-Harris R(4), Barton
S(5), Costello P(4), Garratt E(6), Cook E(4), Titcombe P(5), Shunmuganathan B(3),
Liew SJ(3), Chua YC(3), Lin X(3), Wu Y(3), Burdge GC(4), Cooper C(5), Inskip
HM(7), Karnani N(3), Hopkins JC(8), Childs CE(7), Chavez CP(4), Calder PC(9), Yap
F(10), Lee YS(11), Chong YS(12), Melton PE(13), Beilin L(14), Huang RC(15),
Gluckman PD(16), Harvey N(7), Hanson MA(6), Holbrook JD(3); EpiGen Consortium,
Godfrey KM(17).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biological Sciences, Faculty of Natural and Environmental Sciences,
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK; NIHR Southampton Biomedical Research 
Centre, University of Southampton, University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation
Trust, Southampton, UK.
(2)Academic Unit of Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Southampton, Southampton, UK. Electronic address: rm2v10@soton.ac.uk.
(3)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore.
(4)Academic Unit of Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(5)MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(6)NIHR Southampton Biomedical Research Centre, University of Southampton,
University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK; Academic
Unit of Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(7)Academic Unit of Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Southampton, Southampton, UK; MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of 
Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(8)Academic Unit of Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(9)NIHR Southampton Biomedical Research Centre, University of Southampton,
University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK; Academic
Unit of Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Southampton, UK; Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of
Science, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(10)Department of Paediatrics, KK Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore;
Duke NUS Graduate School of Medicine, Singapore; Lee Kong Chian School of
Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
(11)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore; Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo 
Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(12)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore; Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore,
Singapore.
(13)Centre for Genetics of Health and Disease, University of Western, Australia; 
Faculty of Health Science, Curtin University, Australia.
(14)School of Medicine and Pharmacology, University of Western Australia,
Australia.
(15)Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.
(16)Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(17)NIHR Southampton Biomedical Research Centre, University of Southampton,
University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK; Academic
Unit of Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Southampton, UK; MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of
Southampton, Southampton, UK.

Experimental studies show a substantial contribution of early life environment to
obesity risk through epigenetic processes. We examined inter-individual DNA
methylation differences in human birth tissues associated with child's adiposity.
We identified a novel association between the level of CpG methylation at birth
within the promoter of the long non-coding RNA ANRIL (encoded at CDKN2A) and
childhood adiposity at age 6-years. An association between ANRIL methylation and 
adiposity was also observed in three additional populations; in birth tissues
from ethnically diverse neonates, in peripheral blood from adolescents, and in
adipose tissue from adults. Additionally, CpG methylation was associated with
ANRIL expression in vivo, and CpG mutagenesis in vitro inhibited ANRIL promoter
activity. Furthermore, CpG methylation enhanced binding to an Estrogen Response
Element within the ANRIL promoter. Our findings demonstrate that perinatal
methylation at loci relevant to gene function may be a robust marker of later
adiposity, providing substantial support for epigenetic processes in mediating
long-term consequences of early life environment on human health.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.03.037 
PMCID: PMC5440605
PMID: 28473239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

