
1. Forum Nutr. 2010;63:64-74. doi: 10.1159/000264394. Epub 2009 Nov 27.

Roles of amylin in satiation, adiposity and brain development.

Lutz TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Physiology, and Zurich Center for Integrative Human
Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. tomlutz@vetphys.uzh.ch

Amylin plays an important role in the control of nutrient fluxes. It is
cosecreted with insulin and reduces eating by promoting meal-ending satiation.
This effect seems to depend on a stimulation of amylin receptors in the area
postrema. Subsequent to area postrema activation, the neural signal is conveyed
to the forebrain via distinct relays in the nucleus of the solitary tract and the
lateral parabrachial nucleus to the lateral hypothalamic area and other
hypothalamic nuclei; the functional roles of these relays in amylin's eating
inhibitory effect have not been fully investigated. Amylin may also play a role
in the regulation of adiposity. Plasma levels of amylin are increased in
adiposity, although the precise relation is unknown. Furthermore, chronic
infusion of amylin into the brain reduced body weight gain and adiposity, and
chronic infusion of an amylin receptor antagonist increased body adiposity. Both 
these animal data and pre-clinical research in humans indicate that amylin is a
promising option for anti-obesity therapy, especially in combination with leptin.
Finally, recent findings indicate that amylin may also be necessary for normal
brain development; it acts as a neurotrophic factor for the development of
brainstem pathways involved in the control of eating. How this may be relevant
under physiological conditions requires further studies, but these findings
substantiate the concept that amylin plays an integrative role in the development
and operation of neural circuits involved in the control of eating and energy
homeostasis.

Copyright (c) 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000264394 
PMID: 19955774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

