
1. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2012;(209):231-50. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-24716-3_10.

Effects of amylin on eating and adiposity.

Lutz TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Physiology and Zurich Center for Integrative Human
Physiology, University of Zurich, Switzerland. tomlutz@vetphys.uzh.ch

Amylin's best investigated function is to reduce eating via a meal size effect by
promoting meal-ending satiation. This effect seems to depend on an activation of 
specific area postrema neurons. Brain areas that convey the neural signal to the 
forebrain include the nucleus of the solitary tract and the lateral parabrachial 
nucleus. Acute application of amylin modulates the activity of hypothalamic areas
involved in the control of eating, namely, the lateral hypothalamic area and
possibly the ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus. Amylin also interacts with other 
satiating signals, such as cholecystokinin, presumably in the brainstem.
Interestingly, amylin also exhibits characteristics of adiposity signals; plasma 
levels of amylin are higher in obese individuals, chronic infusion of amylin into
the brain reduces body weight gain and adiposity, and infusion of amylin
antagonists increases adiposity. Furthermore, amylin maintains energy expenditure
at higher levels than would be expected considering its body weight-lowering
effect. However, much less is known (e.g., site of action, signaling pathways,
differential activation of brain sites, and, most importantly, physiological
relevance) with respect to its role as adiposity signal and regulator of energy
expenditure than about its satiating action. Notwithstanding, and perhaps because
amylin resistance does not seem to be a general and prohibitive concomitant of
obesity, animal data and recent clinical data in humans indicate that amylin is a
very promising candidate for the treatment of obesity. Amylin seems to be
particularly effective when combined with other hormones such as leptin.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-24716-3_10 
PMID: 22249817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

