
1. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2012 Sep-Oct;18(5):445-52.

Micro- and macro-level correlates of adiposity in children.

Yin Z(1), Moore JB, Johnson MH, Vernon MM, Grimstvedt M, Gutin B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Kinesiology, University of Texas at San Antonio, USA.

CONTEXT: Recently, studies using a social ecological perspective have identified 
important micro- and macro-level risk factors for excessive adiposity in youth.
Although considerable research exists examining these relationships, few studies 
have applied a socioecological approach to simultaneously examine both micro- and
macro-level factors in young children while objectively assessing adiposity via
dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA).
OBJECTIVE: To examine race and sex differences in adiposity measured by DXA in a 
large sample of young children and to identify both micro- and macro-level
correlates of adiposity.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: Elementary school children (N = 495) from the
southeastern United States participated. Anthropometrics, percentage body fat via
DXA, and psychosocial variables via questionnaire were assessed in the Fall of
2003. Community-level sociodemographic data and built-environment variables via
geographic information system were collected in Spring 2009. Data analyses were
completed in the Spring of 2010.
RESULTS: Percentage body fat in white children was higher than in nonwhite
children. Higher percentage body fat and poorer cardiovascular fitness were found
in females compared with males. Percentage body fat was higher in children who
had lower athletic competence and lived in neighborhoods with higher percentages 
of minority residents.
CONCLUSION: This study provides preliminary support for the social-ecological
model to explain variance in adiposity in children. Developers of health
promotion programs for children living in minority neighborhoods should consider 
factors at multiple levels of the ecological model when designing and
implementing programs.

DOI: 10.1097/PHH.0b013e31821dce0d 
PMID: 22836536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

