
1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 24;9(2):e89828. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089828. eCollection
2014.

Telomere length as a biomarker for adiposity changes after a multidisciplinary
intervention in overweight/obese adolescents: the EVASYON study.

García-Calzón S(1), Moleres A(1), Marcos A(2), Campoy C(3), Moreno LA(4),
Azcona-Sanjulián MC(5), Martínez-González MA(6), Martínez JA(7), Zalba G(8),
Marti A(7); EVASYON Study Group.

Collaborators: Marcos A, Campoy C, López-Belmonte G, Delgado M, Martín-Matillas
M, Aparicio V, Carbonell A, Agil A, Silva DR, Pérez-Ballesteros C, Piqueras MJ,
Chillón P, Tercedor P, Martín-Lagos JA, Martín-Bautista E, Pérez-Expósito M,
Garófano M, Aguilar MJ, Fernández-Mayorga A, Sánchez P, Marcos A, Wärnberg J,
Puertollano MA, Gómez-Martínez S, Zapatera B, Nova E, Romeo J, Díaz EL, Pozo T,
Morandé G, Villaseñor A, Madruga D, Muñoz R, Veiga OL, Villagra A, Martínez-Gómez
D, Garcia RM, Vaquero MP, Pérez-Granados AM, Navas-Carretero S, Martí A,
Azcona-Sanjulián MC, Moleres A, Rendo-Urteaga T, Marqués M, Martínez JA,
Redondo-Figuero C, García-Fuentes M, DeRufino P, González-Lamuño D, Amigo T,
Lanza R, Noriega MJ, Garagorri JM, Moreno LA, Romero P, De Miguel P, Rodríguez G,
Bueno G, Mesana MI, Vicente G, Fernández J, Rey-López P, Muro C, Tomás C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Food Science and Physiology, University of Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain.
(2)Immunonutrition Research Group, Department of Metabolism and Nutrition,
Institute of Food Science, Technology, and Nutrition, Instituto del Frío, Spanish
National Research Council, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Pediatric Department, Medicine School, Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain.
(4)GENUD (Growth, Exercise, Nutrition and Development) Research Group, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Salud, University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain.
(5)Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, University of Navarra 
Hospital, Pamplona, Spain.
(6)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, University of Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain ; CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn),
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Department of Nutrition, Food Science and Physiology, University of Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain ; CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn),
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Navarra, Pamplona,
Spain.

CONTEXT: Telomeres are biomarkers of biological aging. Shorter telomeres have
been associated with increased adiposity in adults. However, this relationship
remains unclear in children and adolescents.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between telomere length (TL) and adiposity
markers in overweight/obese adolescents after an intensive program. We
hypothesize that greater TL at baseline would predict a better response to a
weight loss treatment.
DESIGN SETTING PATIENTS AND INTERVENTION: The EVASYON is a multidisciplinary
treatment program for adolescents with overweight and obesity that is aimed at
applying the intervention to all possibly involved areas of the individual, such 
as dietary habits, physical activity and cognitive and psychological profiles.
Seventy-four participants (36 males, 38 females, 12-16 yr) were enrolled in the
intervention program: 2 months of an energy-restricted diet and a follow-up
period (6 months).
MAIN OUTCOME: TL was measured by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
at baseline and after 2 months; meanwhile, anthropometric variables were also
assessed after 6 months of follow-up.
RESULTS: TL lengthened in participants during the intensive period (+1.9±1.0,
p<0.001) being greater in overweight/obese adolescents with the shortest
telomeres at baseline (r = -0.962, p<0.001). Multivariable linear regression
analysis showed that higher baseline TL significantly predicted a higher decrease
in body weight (B = -1.53, p = 0.005; B = -2.25, p = 0.047) and in standard
deviation score for body mass index (BMI-SDS) (B = -0.22, p = 0.010; B = -0.47,
p = 0.005) after the intensive and extensive period treatment respectively, in
boys.
CONCLUSION: Our study shows that a weight loss intervention is accompanied by a
significant increase in TL in overweight/obese adolescents. Moreover, we suggest 
that initial longer TL could be a potential predictor for a better weight loss
response.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089828 
PMCID: PMC3933678
PMID: 24587065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

