
1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 May;28(5-6):571-7. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2014-0432.

Osteocalcin is inversely associated with adiposity and leptin in adolescent boys.

Jürimäe J, Lätt E, Mäestu J, Saar M, Purge P, Maasalu K, Jürimäe T.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Recently, osteocalcin (OC), an osteoblast-derived hormone, has
been found to correlate with adiposity, adipocytokines and insulin resistance in 
adults, but few studies have investigated this in children. The aim of this study
was to investigate these associations in adolescent boys, for whom it is a time
of significant bone mineral accrual, taking into account possible confounders
related to adipose and bone tissues.
PARTICIPANTS/METHODS: Participants were 141 adolescent boys (mean age 13.9±0.7
years), who were divided into tertiles according to OC levels. Across these
groups, differences in total body fat mass (FM), body fat distribution,
adiponectin, leptin and insulin resistance values were examined with relation to 
age, pubertal stage, daily energy and calcium intakes, and physical activity.
RESULTS: Mean body mass index (BMI), FM, body fat% and leptin differed
significantly between subjects in the three OC tertiles after adjustment for age,
pubertal stage, energy and calcium intakes, and physical activity. There were no 
differences in fat free mass (FFM), bone mineral content, energy and calcium
intakes, physical activity, adiponectin and insulin resistance values between
study groups. For the entire cohort, mean serum OC was 130.2±45.2 ng/mL and was
related to body mass, BMI, FM, body fat distribution and leptin. Circulating OC
was not associated with FFM, daily energy and calcium intakes, physical activity,
adiponectin or insulin resistance (insulin, glucose, homeostasis model
assessment-insulin resistance) values.
CONCLUSIONS: In male adolescents, OC is inversely related to body adiposity and
leptin values, even after consideration of several factors that may affect bone
and adipose tissues.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2014-0432 
PMID: 25741787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

