
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2015 Apr 15;572:112-125. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2015.02.022.
Epub 2015 Feb 23.

Carotenoids and their conversion products in the control of adipocyte function,
adiposity and obesity.

Luisa Bonet M(1), Canas JA(2), Ribot J(3), Palou A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Nutrition and Biotechnology-Nutrigenomics,
Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, and CIBER Fisiopatología de 
la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Spain. Electronic address: luisabonet@uib.es.
(2)Metabolism and Diabetes, Nemours Children's Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32207,
United States.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Nutrition and Biotechnology-Nutrigenomics,
Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, and CIBER Fisiopatología de 
la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Spain.

A novel perspective of the function of carotenoids and carotenoid-derived
products - including, but not restricted to, the retinoids - is emerging in
recent years which connects these compounds to the control of adipocyte biology
and body fat accumulation, with implications for the management of obesity,
diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Cell and animal studies indicate that
carotenoids and carotenoids derivatives can reduce adiposity and impact key
aspects of adipose tissue biology including adipocyte differentiation,
hypertrophy, capacity for fatty acid oxidation and thermogenesis (including
browning of white adipose tissue) and secretory function. Epidemiological studies
in humans associate higher dietary intakes and serum levels of carotenoids with
decreased adiposity. Specifically designed human intervention studies, though
still sparse, indicate a beneficial effect of carotenoid supplementation in the
accrual of abdominal adiposity. The objective of this review is to summarize
recent findings in this area, place them in physiological contexts, and provide
likely regulatory schemes whenever possible. The focus will be on the effects of 
carotenoids as nutritional regulators of adipose tissue biology and both animal
and human studies, which support a role of carotenoids and retinoids in the
prevention of abdominal adiposity.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2015.02.022 
PMID: 25721497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

