
1. Diabetes Care. 2016 Oct;39(10):1745-51. doi: 10.2337/dc16-0269. Epub 2016 Aug 3.

Longitudinal Associations of Exposure to Perfluoroalkylated Substances in
Childhood and Adolescence and Indicators of Adiposity and Glucose Metabolism 6
and 12 Years Later: The European Youth Heart Study.

Domazet SL(1), Grøntved A(2), Timmermann AG(3), Nielsen F(4), Jensen TK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics, Division of Exercise
Epidemiology, Centre of Research in Childhood Health, University of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark sdomazet@health.sdu.dk.
(2)Department of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics, Division of Exercise
Epidemiology, Centre of Research in Childhood Health, University of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(3)Institute of Public Health, Department of Environmental Medicine, University
of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(4)Institute of Public Health, Department of Environmental Medicine, University
of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark Institute of Public Health, Department of
Clinical Pharmacology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2016 Nov;12 (11):625.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the long-term association of exposure to
perfluoroalkylated substances, including perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) and 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), during childhood (9 years) and adolescence (15
years) on indicators of adiposity and glucose metabolism in adolescence (15
years) and young adulthood (21 years). Secondarily, we aim to clarify the degree 
of tracking of exposure from childhood into young adulthood.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Data derived from a large multicenter prospective
cohort study, in which the same participants have been observed from childhood (N
= 590), during adolescence (N = 444), and into young adulthood (N = 369). Stored 
plasma samples were analyzed for PFOS and PFOA. Indicators of adiposity
comprising body height, body weight, sum of four skinfolds, and waist
circumference, as well as indicators of glucose metabolism, comprising fasting
blood glucose, triglyceride, and insulin levels, β-cell function, and insulin
resistance, have been collected at all study waves. Multiple linear regression
was applied in order to model earlier exposure on later outcome while controlling
for baseline outcome levels, sex, age, and socioeconomic factors.
RESULTS: Childhood exposure to PFOS was associated with indicators of adiposity
at 15 years of age that are displayed in elevated BMI, skinfold thickness, and
waist circumference, as well as increased skinfold thickness and waist
circumference at 21 years of age. PFOA exposure in childhood was associated with 
decreased β-cell function at 15 years of age. We did not observe associations
between exposure during adolescence and indicators of adiposity and glucose
metabolism in young adulthood.
CONCLUSIONS: This study found evidence for childhood exposure to PFOS and PFOA
predicting adiposity at 15 and 21 years of age and impaired β-cell function at 15
years of age, respectively.

© 2016 by the American Diabetes Association.

DOI: 10.2337/dc16-0269 
PMID: 27489335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

